---
date: March 10, 2024 00:00:00 EDT
logo: https://i.imgur.com/xoFQ3Aa.png
description: I started working on a clone of the Sans boss fight from Undertale.
_draft: true
---

# TI Sans Undertale

I've been working on a clone of the Sans boss fight from Undertale for the TI-84 Plus CE calculator. I felt that it was time to write up a blog post on this since I've been working on it for over a month. In that month, I've made lots of progress.

I would like to note that from here onwards "TI-84" and "TI-84 Plus CE" will be used interchangeable unless stated otherwise.

Before I cover Sans, I would like to explain how I got to this point.

## Prologue

Even before I got my first TI-84, I saw videos on [YouTube](https://youtu.be/ZvPb9plO6dY) that peaked my interest on the modding scene. I loved the concept of being able to play [GameBoy](https://github.com/calc84maniac/tiboyce) games during math class.

When I first go my hands on one of Texas Instruments' calculators, I wanted to learn every bell and whistle. At first, I started learning how to use the built-in language (TI-BASIC). I would learn how slow and tedious it is to program in TI-BASIC. The CPU didn't have a better time with the language either. This pushed me to look into assembly programs written in EZ80.

Before this point, I only had little understanding of a CPU's inner workings. I could tell learning EZ80 would be very daunting.

I found an assembler called [SPASM-NG](https://github.com/alberthdev/spasm-ng) and started spewing out code in hopes it would work. After much searching the inter-webs, I found some good resources for the TI-84 Plus (monochrome). While it had an old CPU, there were many similarities.

I wrote a rudimentary hello world program and was able to run it. After getting to this point, I lost a lot of motivation and took a break. It wouldn't be till many month later I would try something more complicated.

### Space Invaders

Space Invaders: my choice of retro game to clone in order to learn about a game engine. In this case, I don't have a game engine&mdash;let alone a compiler.

The biggest take away from [the project](https://github.thepinkhacker.com/ti-space-invaders) I wanted was an understanding of graphics works on the TI-84. At first I tried rendering through the graph buffer for "simplicity", but found many issues with this. I would eventually figure out VRAM exists and it's really simple to change pixel data.[^1]

::pixel-img
---
src: /image/blog/ti-space-invaders.webp
alt: An animated game of Space Invaders.
---
::

I never did finish this project it did teach me many of the inner workings of the TI-84 and EZ80 processor.

## Getting Started

A friend of mine wanted to play the Sans boss fight on his calculator, but after searching far and wide, no one else had recreated it. This sat in the back of my mind up until February this year. I was now at the point where I had the knowledge to create remake the game myself.

I quickly whipped up a proof of concept and like that I had started remaking the boss fight.

I reused a lot of code from the [Space Invaders](#space-invaders) clone. The biggest thing I wanted was my sprite generator. Instead of using CE-Programming's [sprite gen tool](https://github.com/mateoconlechuga/convimg), I opted for a [custom rust-based solution](https://github.thepinkhacker.com/ti-sans-undertale/tree/main/asset-builder). It uses a TOML api to define sprites. Currently, it's intended for internal use, but nothing is stopping others from using it in their own projects. Here's an example of what the player souls look like:

```toml
[player.sprites]
heart_blue = "sprites/player/heart_blue.png"
heart_red = "sprites/player/heart_red.png"
```

This would output a assembly file, containing the converted sprites, called `player.asm`. Here's what the sprites look like:

```asm
heart_blue:
    .width := 8
    .height := 8

    db .width, .height
    db $0,$18,$0,$0,$0,$0,$18,$0
    db $18,$18,$18,$0,$0,$18,$18,$18
    db $18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18
    db $18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18
    db $18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18
    db $0,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$18,$0
    db $0,$0,$18,$18,$18,$18,$0,$0
    db $0,$0,$0,$18,$18,$0,$0,$0

heart_red:
    .width := 8
    .height := 8

    db .width, .height
    db $0,$E0,$0,$0,$0,$0,$E0,$0
    db $E0,$E0,$E0,$0,$0,$E0,$E0,$E0
    db $E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0
    db $E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0
    db $E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0
    db $0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$0
    db $0,$0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$E0,$0,$0
    db $0,$0,$0,$E0,$E0,$0,$0,$0
```

Having the output be an assembly file makes if far easier to link the sprites into the rest of the game.

::pixel-img
---
src: https://i.imgur.com/vIeZZ5a.png
alt: Sans' monochrome sprite over a box containing the player's red soul. Under the box, there are 4 UI buttons reading "fight", "act", "item", and "mercy".
---
::

Unlike my [previous project](#space-invaders), I opted to use the [CE-Toolchain](https://github.com/CE-Programming/toolchain). Before, I was using all my own rendering code, but there are far more smarter people making vastly more efficient render routines for sprites and other tasks I might need to do.

## Gaster Blasters

When I started this project, I was worried if the calculator could handel complex sprites such as Gaster Blasters. Drawing a standard sprite to the screen is relatively simple. It becomes far more complex if the sprite has to be modified on runtime. Rotating a sprite would normally be an incredibly taxing operation, but there's a short cut. With my go to method of speed over space, I just need to precalculate the sprites. So instead of just one sprite, every single rotation is it's own sprite. This works out to be about 380-ish kb[^2]. This fits nicely into 6 files&mdash;one per animation frame.

::pixel-img
---
src: https://i.imgur.com/T1OstuY.png
alt: Sans, the player soul, and the UI buttons all are rotated 45° to clockwise.
---
::

## Text

::pixel-img
---
src: https://i.imgur.com/KBXra5F.png
alt: Sans, the player soul, and the UI buttons are on the screen in their normal places. There is text at the top of the screen reading "SANS UNDERTALE!? Cool beans…".
---
::

## Hud

::pixel-img
---
src: https://i.imgur.com/xoFQ3Aa.png
alt: Sans, the player soul, and the UI buttons are on the screen in their normal places. There is now a HUD with text reading "chara lv 19 hp", then a health bar partially depleted. Lastly, there's more text after the bar reading "kr 90/92".
---
::

## What's Next?

Currently, I'm working on the attack system. Once I can get this to a stable point, I can start recreating each attack of the fight.

I will post smaller, less frequent, updates on [Cohost](https://cohost.org/the-pink-hacker) and [Cemetech](https://www.cemetech.net/forum/viewtopic.php?t=19491).

[^1]: Unless you want to use v-sync or double-buffered rendering.

[^2]: <code>(6 frames \* 20 rotations)(2 + 56 \* 56) = 376,560</code>
